---
layout: post
title:  Getting my first job
date: 2020-03-29
description: a journey to land a data analyst role in Indonesia's tech unicorn
---

One year ago, around this time, I was in my final year, applying countless of jobs and feeling anxious like other senior-year kids with so much worries of what the future holds after life in college. I knew certainly I wanted to work in banking in Indonesia and left Hong Kong for good. I never expected I would work in tech companies, let alone working as a data analyst (or commonly known as business analyst). The idea of pursuing a career in data seems so far away due to my lack of technical skills, as most people got the role with backgrounds in math, engineering or statistics. Fast forward now, I am working full time as a data analyst - a seemingly far-flung idea that surprisingly becomes a reality.

I came from a business background with four years full of finance courses, from learning how to trade stocks to writing a business proposal and presenting ideas confidently. I was trained and prepared to work in corporates and ready to be the corporate slave. I was thinking the right career path was to work in banks. Hence, getting management associate program was my priority. But then, as my finance professor said, "Do not put all of your eggs in one basket", I decided to apply roles outside my field, including data analyst. I still remember vividly I was scrolling through Tokopedia's instagram and watched a short two-minute video of this guy (who later becomes my lead) explaining how exciting it is to work there. I have no idea but I was so motivated and inspired which led me to apply the analyst role on their career website, knowing that the odds are too high. Surprisingly, I was called by the HR manager one month later, only to be told to complete the technical test. I didn't see it coming. I asked whether the test can be arranged online, since they asked me to do on-site and they agreed. I was lucky I still had time to prepare for two days despite spending intense hours in library recalling statistics and SQL from a database course, which turns out to be helpful. FYI, I took a minor in computing (which I did not complete) and learned some web development courses. At that time, I was also busy preparing my HR interview for a bank, attending interview preparation seminar and juggling with academics and organization activity. My final year was hectic and arduous. 

Two days later, I completed the test which I found pretty challenging, especially for those without technical backgrounds. First few questions were about statistics, some were logic and data visualization questions and last four are SQL questions, the most important part. I was not certain with my answers - I managed to get 1 SQL question right and the rest involve statistical formula that I was not familar with. I knew I failed the test. After gruelling months of job hunting, I made my ways to the final round and got two interview invitations: an asessment day from a bank and a user-interview unexpectedly from Tokopedia. I thought I did not do great job in the technical test and feel pessimistic that they would proceed with the rest of recruitment process. I packed my stuff and went to Indonesia for those two interviews, which happened to be held two days apart. I took these interviews very seriously, as I kinda screwed up my previous one. I researched  literally everything possible questions that might be asked and practice in front of mirror. Yes, I was that prepared. Two weeks later, I got emails, stating that I got both positions. I was extremely happy that finally all these uncertainties would come to an end. But, at the same time, I did not know which one to choose. The bank offered better benefits, but I knew I might not have another opportunity to work in this field. Then, I decided to accept Tokopedia's offer. 

In retrospect, I feel job-hunting was completely stressful, but it taught me a lot too. I know that I have a slim chance. There might be thousands of applicants eyeing for the position. But, I would not have had the chance to work here if I had not tried with my utmost effort. You will never know unless you try. For those of you who are still applying jobs, hang in there cos I know the feeling of uncertainties. Keep applying. And of course, revise your CV, research the role you want and always prepare before interview. Good luck!

<blockquote>
  You can't ever reach perfection, but you can believe in an asymptote toward which you are ceaselessly striving.
  —Paul Kalanithi
</blockquote>


